Deep Space 1: Rocketing to the Future


by Marc D. Rayman, Ph.D.
Deep Space 1 Deputy Mission Manager and Chief Mission Engineer
Jet Propulsion Laboratory

Science fiction and space enthusiasts as well as space scientists have long
dreamed of having routine access to space, a ready supply of probes to
greet unexpected and enticing visitors to our neighborhood (such as comet
Hale-Bopp), and smart robots investigating the universe.  That dream comes
one step closer to reality this autumn, when NASA/JPL rockets toward the
future with the launch of Deep Space 1 (DS1), humankind's next venture into
the solar system.

Space science missions have made many astonishing and impressive
discoveries, but often at great expense.  NASA and the United States cannot
afford to conduct space exploration the way it has been done in recent
decades.  We now look forward to a future in which rather than launching a
spacecraft into deep space every year or so, they will be launched every
month.  If one or two of them fail, although it will be disappointing, the
loss will represent a small portion of our effort to know the cosmos.

But how do we meet the challenges of such a future?  We need to learn to
build spacecraft quickly, to make them small enough to be launched on
inexpensive rockets, and fast enough to reach their destinations while the
questions they are addressing are still relevant.  The spacecraft must also
be sufficiently sophisticated to collect the exciting information we seek,
and smart enough to handle unexpected situations without all of them tying
up the precious and expensive Deep Space Network.  Part of the answer is to
introduce advanced technologies.  Unfortunately, that means risk, because
there will always be a lingering uncertainty over whether the new systems
will work in space the way we predict.  As a result, revolutionary
technologies often have inordinate waits before finding their way aboard
space missions.

NASA's New Millennium program is chartered to validate selected high-risk
technologies needed to make space exploration less expensive yet even more
exciting and productive.  Advanced technologies chosen for validation on
DS1, the first of the program's space flights, include ion propulsion,
autonomous systems, advanced microelectronics and telecommunications
devices, and other exotic systems. Throughout the flight, the technology
payload will be rigorously exercised so that later space missions will be
able to use the new capabilities with confidence.  This bold mission will
take risks so that future missions do not have to.

Even if a technology fails on this ambitious flight, we may still help
prevent later missions from taking too much risk.  In fact, already in the
39 months between conception and launch (unprecedentedly short for US
planetary missions in the modern era), we have solved a host of problems
that would never have been addressed if the new technologies remained in
the realm of paper studies and laboratory tests.  This has already
contributed to their use in future missions.

As you might imagine, working on a high-risk mission with such a short
schedule and a tight cost cap can be stressful.  I find, however, that the
personal rewards are quite high.  In my role as Chief Mission Engineer and
Deputy Mission Manager, I get to be involved in nearly all aspects of the
project.  For a lifelong space buff, this is a dream come true!

My position allows me to combine my many years of formal training in
physics with my even longer personal studies of all aspects of space
exploration.  I chose to abandon basic scientific research so that I could
get paid to pursue my hobby at JPL.  Now I find that, indeed, I can play a
meaningful role in a thrilling space mission that truly will make an
important difference as we strive to probe the universe. At the same time,
I feel proud that a significant goal of my work is to protect taxpayers'
money.  Although NASA receives only a small fraction of what your family
and mine pay in taxes, it gratifies me to know that my work contributes to
spending that moneywisely, trying to get the maximum benefit from each
dollar invested.

During its journey, DS1 will visit asteroid 1992 KD and perhaps comets
Wilson-Harrington and Borrelly, performing tests of its advanced science
instruments at each appointment.  Conducting science will prove that the
technologies are compatible with the demands of future science missions and
will ensure that this rare opportunity to encounter such a variety of
fascinating solar system bodies during a short mission will be fully
exploited.

Ion propulsion will permit faster access to important and fascinating
destinations in the solar system.  Autonomy will reduce the cost of
operating such missions.  Miniaturized systems will make spacecraft smaller
and less expensive, while new highly capable instruments will make
sophisticated measurements with small packages.  Such revolutionary
technologies, and others to be validated on subsequent New Millennium
missions, will be among the key tools NASA will need to begin a new era in
space exploration.  By taking risk with missions such as Deep Space 1, NASA
is preparing for the time when humankind's robotic (and, eventually, human)
emissaries to space are routinely reporting back inspiring discoveries from
throughout the solar system and beyond.

I invite you to share the DS1 team's excitement as we try to make the
future happen and turn fantasy into reality.  Visit
http://nmp.jpl.nasa.gov/ds1.



(Updated from an article submitted to Final Frontier and published in June
1998.)

